---
layout: post
title: Spheres in Bricklayer
categories: [Programming 3D Artifacts]
tags: level4, 3D, sphere
author: Betty Love
---

#### Topics on this page
{:.no_toc}
* TOC
{:toc}

In this post we'll explore spheres in Bricklayer Level 4.  For an introduction to programming in the  Level 4, check out [this post](/getting-started-with-level4).

Where you see this icon,
{% include image.html img="dot-bl.png"  alt=".bl icon"  %}
click on it to download the associated bricklayer program.

***

### Sphere functions in Bricklayer Level 4

Bricklayer has two sphere functions: _sphere_ and _hollowSphere_. Official documentation on these and other Level-4 functions is available at [bricklayer.org](https://bricklayer.org) (Apps -> Bricklayer -> Level 4 - Document).  In this post, we'll start with the _sphere_ function.

#### Bricklayer _sphere_ function

The _sphere_ function produces a sphere (duh!), i.e., a ball.  This is a 3D artifact. To create a sphere, we need to know three things:
   - how big it should be
   - what color(s) it should be
   - where it should be

These three things define the parameters for the _sphere_ function. Specifically, the parameters are:  
   - radius
   - a list of colors, written as [color1,color2,etc]
   - the center, written as a location in 3D space

The _sphere_ command looks like:
```
sphere radius [color1,color2,etc] (x,y,z)
```
The following command creates a blue sphere with radius 10 with center (15,15,15):
{% include dotbl.html blfile="level4/sphere01.bl"  %}
```
sphere 10 [BLUE] (15,15,15);
```
{% include image.html img="level4/sphere01.png"  alt="Blue sphere"  %}

Let's put three side-by-side (radii 5, 10, and 15) for perspective.
{% include dotbl.html blfile="level4/sphere02.bl"  %}
```
sphere 5  [BLUE] (10,20,20);
sphere 10 [BLUE] (30,20,20);
sphere 15 [BLUE] (60,20,20);
```
{% include image.html img="level4/sphere02.png"  alt="Three blue spheres"  %}

#### List of colors?
Let's explore what happens when we have more than one color in our list of colors. I'll change up our three spheres as follows. {% include dotbl.html blfile="level4/sphere03.bl"  %}
```
sphere 5  [BLUE,YELLOW] (10,20,20);
sphere 10 [RED, GREEN] (30,20,20);
sphere 15 [PINK, VIOLET] (60,20,20);
```
{% include image.html img="level4/sphere03.png"  alt="Three bi-color spheres"  %}

But we're not limited to just two colors.  You can include as many as you'd like.  Here's one with three colors. {% include dotbl.html blfile="level4/sphere04.bl"  %}
```
sphere 10 [RED,ORANGE,YELLOW] (15,15,15);
```
{% include image.html img="level4/sphere04.png"  alt="A red, orange, and yellow sphere"  %}

At this point if you've been running the .bl files yourself, you may have noticed that as your artifacts include more bricks, it can take longer for your computer to display them. It is easy to generate a lot of bricks when creating spheres.  In fact, we can look at the output in the bricklayer console window to see how many bricks are in an artifact.  The screenshot below shows how to look for this (first scroll to the bottom of the console window, then up until you see this part).  Notice that our red, orange, and yellow sphere is made up of 4,945 bricks!
{% include image.html img="level4/sphere05.png"  alt="A red, orange, and yellow sphere"  %}

#### Bricklayer _hollowSphere_ function
The _hollowSphere_ function provides a way to create the same look as the _sphere_ command without all the inner bricks that one cannot see.  The parameters are the same except for one additional parameter for _hollowSphere_ to indicate the thickness of the surface of the sphere.  The maximum value for this is 10 and it yields a sphere that looks exactly like the output from the _sphere_ command, but with the unseen bricks deleted.  This allows us to create larger spheres without slowing down the computer too much.

The general form of the _hollowSphere_ command is:
```
hollowSphere radius thickness [colors] location;
```
I'll create a sphere that looks like the previous one using _hollowSphere_ with a thickness of 10. 
{% include dotbl.html blfile="level4/sphere05.bl"  %}
```
hollowSphere 10 10 [RED,ORANGE,YELLOW] (15,15,15);
```
{% include image.html img="level4/sphere06.png"  alt="Hollow sphere with thickness 10"  %}
Now let's check the bricklayer console to see how many bricks are in this one.
{% include image.html img="level4/sphere07.png"  alt="A red, orange, and yellow sphere"  %}
2392 bricks in the hollow sphere vs. 4945 in the solid sphere.  Using _hollowSphere_ allows us to create larger spheres with no change in appearance from the outside of the sphere.

What if we used a smaller value for the thickness?  Let's try 5! {% include dotbl.html blfile="level4/sphere06.bl"  %}
```
hollowSphere 10 5 [RED,ORANGE,YELLOW] (15,15,15);
```
{% include image.html img="level4/sphere08.png"  alt="Hollow sphere with thickness 5"  %}

The outside of the sphere is not solid now.  Let's try thickness = 1. 
{% include dotbl.html blfile="level4/sphere07.bl"  %}
```
hollowSphere 10 1 [RED,ORANGE,YELLOW] (15,15,15);
```
{% include image.html img="level4/sphere09.png"  alt="Hollow sphere with thickness 5"  %}
As the thickness decreases, the number of visible bricks on the outside of the sphere also decreases.










