---
layout: post
title: Functions - Adding More Parameters
categories: [Variables and Functions]
tags: functions, featured
author: Betty Love
---

#### Topics on this page
{:.no_toc}
* TOC
{:toc}

In the last [post](/functions01) we learned how to write a function that had parameters that defined the location of a figure.  In this post we'll expand on that and add parameters for color also.

### Parameters

There is no limit to the number of parameters a function can have.  Basically we use parameters to represent anything that we use within the function that we might like to vary.  Location of a figure is an obvious thing we vary because otherwise it would always go in the same place.  But we frequently like to vary color and even the size of blocks within our figure.  

There are two main things to remember:
- List all parameters when you define your function.
- List values for all parameters when you call your function and make sure the order that you list them is the same order as they are listed in the function definition.

So if my function definition starts out like the following:
````
fun figure (xLoc,zLoc) backgroundColor blockColor =
````

Then when I call the function that should look something like this:
````
figure (4,8) BLUE RED
````
instead of
````
figure BLUE RED (4,8)
````

### Example

Let's look at the example we worked on previously.  We wrote code to create the figure below.
{% include image.html img="val/functions01.png"  alt="Functions01"  %}

The code included a function that created one of the elements of the figure at a specified location.  It is shown below. {% include dotbl.html blfile="functions/functions05.bl"  %}

````
open Level_3;

build2D (40,40);

fun blocks (xLoc,zLoc) =
(
    (* Figure at (xLoc,zLoc) *)
    put2D  (2,4)  BLUE    ( xLoc     , zLoc     );
    put2D  (3,3)  RED     ( xLoc + 2 , zLoc     );
    put2D  (2,3)  YELLOW  ( xLoc     , zLoc + 4 );
    put2D  (3,4)  GREEN   ( xLoc + 2 , zLoc + 3 )
);

blocks (0,0);
blocks (14,0);
blocks (7,5);
blocks (4,15);
blocks (13,13);
blocks (20,11);

show ""
````

Let's rewrite this so that we can add parameters for the colors used.  How can we rewrite our code in order to produce the following figure:
{% include image.html img="functions/functions06.png"  alt="Functions06"  %}

The elements are in the same locations as before; they're just different colors now. Since there are four colors used, we need four more parameters.  I'm going to call them _llColor_, _lrColor_, _ulColor_, and _urColor_ to indicate the colors, respectively, for the lower left part, the lower right part, the upper left part and the upper right part of each element. So, for the element at (0,0):

````
llColor = BLUE
lrColor = RED
ulColor = YELLOW
urColor = GREEN
````

We add these parameters to the function definition, so we have:
````
fun blocks (xLoc,zLoc) llColor lrColor ulColor urColor =
````

Now this won't do us any good unless we use these new parameters inside the function!  So we change the body of the function as follows:
````
put2D  (2,4)  llColor     ( xLoc     , zLoc     );
put2D  (3,3)  lrColor     ( xLoc + 2 , zLoc     );
put2D  (2,3)  ulColor     ( xLoc     , zLoc + 4 );
put2D  (3,4)  urColor     ( xLoc + 2 , zLoc + 3 )
````

Now the 2x4 block at (xLoc,zLoc) will be whatever color we use for llColor when we call the function.  Same for the other blocks.  This means that we have to change our function calls to include the colors.  To create the figure above, I used the following function calls:
````
blocks (0,0)   BLUE         RED           YELLOW     GREEN;
blocks (14,0)  VIOLET       YELLOW        PINK       GREEN;
blocks (7,5)   DARKRED      DARKLAVENDER  LIGHTGRAY  LIGHTROYALBLUE;
blocks (4,15)  LIGHTBROWN   BRICKYELLOW   DARKGREEN  LIGHTPINK;
blocks (13,13) BRIGHTGREEN  LAVENDER      STONEGRAY  CLEARBLUE;
blocks (20,11) NOUGAT       SPRING        SILVER     AQUA;
````

To download the entire program, click here: {% include dotbl.html blfile="functions/functions06.bl"  %}






