---
layout: post
title: Functions - Introduction Based on Variables
categories: [Variables and Functions]
tags: functions, featured
author: Betty Love
---

#### Topics on this page
{:.no_toc}
* TOC
{:toc}

In the last [post](/variables-numbers02) we explored using variables to represent  coordinates that define the location that we wanted to place a figure.  As you recall, we used the same block of code over and over with the only changes being in the _val_statements_.  You may have wondered if there was a better way.  Why do we have to copy and past the same code over and over?  Isn't there a way to put it in our program once and just used it multiple times?

### Functions!

YES!!!  The answer is a _function_.  Specifically, a _user-defined function_.  This means a function that you (the user) writes as opposed to one that comes with the language (which is a called a _built-in_ function).  We know a lot of built-in functions. Among these are _put_, _put2D_, _circleXZ_, _sphere_, _ringX_, etc.  If you think about any of these build-in functions, when we learned how to use them, we had to know what their parameters were and in what order they should be listed.  For example, the parameters of the _put2D_ function are, in order, _size_, _color_, and _location_.  This is why we write
```
put2D (5,8) BLUE (2,3)
```
to place a 5x8 blue block at location (2,3).  If, instead, we wrote,
```
put2D BLUE (5,8)  (2,3);
```
we'd get an error when we ran our program.  What if we wrote the following?
```
put2D  (2,3) BLUE (5,8);
```
This time the program runs, but we don't get the output that we wanted (we get a 2x3 block at (5,8) instead of a 5x8 block at (2,3)).

So knowing the parameters that are required for a built-in function and knowing the order in which to list them is critical. The same is true for functions that we write.  When we create a function, we state what parameters are required and specify the order they should be given, then we provide the commands that make up the function.

### Revisit an example

Let's revisit the example we worked on in the previous [post](/variables-numbers02). There we wrote a  program to create the following figure.
{% include image.html img="val/functions01.png"  alt="Functions01"  %}

Our code looked like this.
{% include dotbl.html blfile="val/val-num03.bl"  %}
{% include image.html img="val/val-num07.png"  alt="val-num07"  %}

Notice that all the green blocks of code are identical.  Doesn't it seem like a pain to copy and paste (or worse, type) the same code over and over? It clutters up our program and possibly introduces errors because we may mistype something or when we copy and paste, we may mess something up.  The answer is to just have the code appear once and be able to use it as many times as we want.  

To do that we create a function that consists of the green block of code, that is, the following:

````
put2D  (2,4)  BLUE    ( xLoc     , zLoc     );
put2D  (3,3)  RED     ( xLoc + 2 , zLoc     );
put2D  (2,3)  YELLOW  ( xLoc     , zLoc + 4 );
put2D  (3,4)  GREEN   ( xLoc + 2 , zLoc + 3 );
````

To use this code, the values of _xLoc_ and _zLoc_ must be specified.  Therefore they will be _parameters_ of our function. Following is how we write our function in bricklayer:
````
fun blocks (xLoc,zLoc) =
(
    (* Figure at (xLoc,zLoc) *)
    put2D  (2,4)  BLUE    ( xLoc     , zLoc     );
    put2D  (3,3)  RED     ( xLoc + 2 , zLoc     );
    put2D  (2,3)  YELLOW  ( xLoc     , zLoc + 4 );
    put2D  (3,4)  GREEN   ( xLoc + 2 , zLoc + 3 )
);
````
The figure below explains what all the parts of the functions are and points out some important things to remember.  Study it very carefully.
{% include image.html img="functions/functions05.png"  alt="functions05"  %}

One of the things that is noted in the previous graphic is that the functions needs values for the parameters in order to run.  This is the same idea as we discussed earlier about the _put_ function needing parameters to indicate size, color, and location.  Just running the _put_ command with no parameters accomplishes nothing.

To _call_ or _invoke_ a function, we use the name of the function along with its parameters, e.g.,
```
put2D (5,8) BLUE (2,3)
```

So to use our function, we do the same.  To put our figure at (0,0), we use the command
```
blocks (0,0)
```
_blocks_ is the name of the function and we want _xLoc_ to be 0 and _zLoc_ to be 0.

Following is the entire program that places the figure at (0,0), (14,0), (7,5), (4,15), (13,13), and (20,11). {% include dotbl.html blfile="functions/functions05.bl"  %}

````
open Level_3;

build2D (40,40);

fun blocks (xLoc,zLoc) =
(
    (* Figure at (xLoc,zLoc) *)
    put2D  (2,4)  BLUE    ( xLoc     , zLoc     );
    put2D  (3,3)  RED     ( xLoc + 2 , zLoc     );
    put2D  (2,3)  YELLOW  ( xLoc     , zLoc + 4 );
    put2D  (3,4)  GREEN   ( xLoc + 2 , zLoc + 3 )
);

blocks (0,0);
blocks (14,0);
blocks (7,5);
blocks (4,15);
blocks (13,13);
blocks (20,11);

show ""
````

### What happens when this program is executed?

There are many built-in bricklayer functions, but they don't do anything unless we use them in our programs.  The same applies to functions we create; they do nothing until you _call_ (_invoke_) them.  The graphic below shows what happens when we run the program above. Each function call is converted into code in which the values of the parameters are substituted for those in the function. Study this and make sure you understand it.
{% include image.html img="functions/functions-diagram.png"  alt="functions-diagram"  %}


